Hopefully both are available and ready.
Welcome both.
Thank you.
Kerry just needs to turn the camera and
microphone on. But in the meantime, we've got 10 minutes
with you this afternoon. That includes time for questions, and I'll hand it over to
you now.
Thank you. My name is Mike, as you know, and I'm the chair of New Zealand Deaf
Employers. Kerry is our executive officer.
And what our members do is we put the human before the system.
Our members employ about 25,000 workers,
20% are full-time, 80% are seasonal, and out of the
80% that are seasonal, about half are offshore
workers. So our submission comes from our experience and
our members' experience with the employment of offshore
workers and trying to change the dynamic of
how things work in horticulture, wine grapes,
and processing.
We support the bill, but we very much think it needs to be strengthened.
There is not enough accountability in our view.
It must be more than a paperwork exercise, and to us, it looks a bit like
a paperwork exercise at present.
If something happens, if there's a credible risk or incident, there needs
to be a progression of responses that are mandatory and that
employers need to take. To explain a little bit more, I'll hand over to
Kerry.
Thanks, Mike.
One of the things that we've included in our submission is in
relation to worker voice.
There's a common assumption that low complaint numbers mean low risk,
and in our experience, that's not always the case.
Migrant and seasonal workers can be particularly reluctant to raise concerns for
a whole range of reasons. But if workers don't feel safe speaking up, then some of
the highest risk issues will never appear in a report, audit, or an annual
statement.
And that's why we believe worker voice systems need to be a trusted, safe,
culturally appropriate, and accessible in a worker's own language.
And at NZDE, we provide those systems to our members,
not because
... Excuse me.
At NZDE, we provide our members with those support systems
because we know that hearing directly from workers often provides insights
that aren't visible through compliance reporting alone.
And the second point that we'd like to make is around hidden risks.
So the bill creates visibility, which is really important, and we do support it,
but visibility alone won't protect or detect
modern-day slavery unless there are systems around it that help identify
concerns, hear from the workers, respond to the risks, and support the
enforcement. And some of the highest risk practices
come from smaller, less visible operators further down the supply chain.
And in many of those cases, the people engaging in exploitive
practices are also very good at avoiding scrutiny.
So reporting entities shouldn't become regulators, but they do need a clear
referral and escalation pathway where serious concerns are
identified, and that's where we think the bill could be strengthened.
So there needs to be a clear understanding of who should be notified, what action
is expected, how workers will be protected, and how serious
issues will be addressed.
And the final point that I'd like to make comes from my own
previous experience working in the Labour Inspectorate.
I spent 16 years in the Labour Inspectorate.
And the biggest message there is good systems are most
effective when they're easy to understand.
We need to avoid creating a framework that simply pushes compliance
obligations down onto the smaller employers through reporting requests.
And many businesses, including NZDE members, already operate under
detailed employment, immigration, and worker welfare requirements.
NZDE members are already undertaking human rights due diligence
because it's the right thing to do.
So where credible systems already exist, they should be recognized.
And we also encourage the development of sector-specific guidance and standardized
templates so that businesses can focus their efforts on identifying
and managing genuine risk rather than duplicating paperwork.
So to conclude, we absolutely support the bill.
We support greater transparency and visibility across the supply chains,
and transparency gives us visibility, but visibility alone won't protect the
workers. So for the bill to be effective, it needs to reward substance
over paperwork, and that means providing clear guidance for businesses,
ensuring there are clear pathways for escalation when serious concerns do arise,
supporting worker voice systems, and requiring reasonable action where credible
risks are identified. And with those changes, we think
that this will help turn transparency into better outcomes for workers.
Thank you.
A great package by Kerry there. Fantastic.
Mike, were you rounding off, or are we open for questions?
No, open for questions.
Great.
Nothing better-
We've got one from Camilla Belich.
Thank you both for the work you're doing for submitting on this bill.
Just two questions really. So you've talked a lot about clear expectations for
employers. We've had a lot of submissions around due diligence, which is
likely something that other countries are seeking to
implement in their regimes. And I also just wanted to clarify, you made some
quite detailed oral submissions and also written submissions around
duplication. And I just wanted to
probe that a wee bit, if I may, in that at the
moment, there isn't a
mandatory requirement for large companies to report on their supply
chains. And,
so what is the kind of the issue with duplication that you
think-What's the problem that-- I
appreciate that you said there will be duplication, but what's the problem
that you are seeking to raise with us in respect of that?
Kerry?
I think
possibly duplication might not be quite the right word, but
I know for our members who operate,
particularly when they're operating under some of the
immigration schemes, they're already heavily audited.
And so there's already a whole lot of reporting that goes
on. So
I think in my mind, if we
have a human rights structure that already recognizes some of those
systems, rather than having to create
a whole new
process just for the worker boys, for the
modern-day slavery regime, if we can look at developing
something that recognizes those systems are already in existence and what that
might mean,
particularly around the auditing that goes on in those
processes.
And the first question, Kerry.
Which was Katie, sorry, Camilla-
Sorry
... what was your first question again? Sorry, Camilla.
I just wanted to know if you supported the due diligence-
Oh
... requirements that-
Absolutely.
Yeah.
Absolutely support, sorry.
Great. And we have time for a question from Dr. Parmjeet Parmar.
Thank you. A very quick clarification from you about due diligence, and you also
spoke about how far you go in the supply chain, in a multi-tier
supply chain.
And want to understand, for due diligence, whose
obligation it should be because if you're relying on that overseas company,
basically you're relying on some paperwork that that company will produce
after the audit is done or whatever process is adopted.
So how do you think that the business here can be
100% sure about that due diligence, and how
do you see it working?
I think
for
the incoming due diligence, so if we're talking about receiving
product from overseas
suppliers, that's quite a different focus to NZEU's
focus, which is on the outgoing. So,
most of our employers are SMEs who won't be captured by
the proposed
reporting levels at the moment, but they will be captured in the
downstream. So those employers who will be
required to report will be seeking further information from the
smaller SMEs in their chains, and that's where
our concern around duplication came from.
Mike, do you want to talk to
the-
Yeah
... other side?
So one of the things we do with our members, because they recruit
offshore, is give them a contract to use
for if they use anyone recruiting offshore and some checklists
which they can use. And so they become intimately involved in what is
happening offshore. They just don't take the word for it or a bit of
paper. It requires an active involvement, and
that probably involves going to that country and ensuring that things are
being done properly. Because all the workers who come into
New Zealand, there's an enormous risk that they've paid some amazing amount of
money to someone to actually get the opportunity to come to New
Zealand when they don't have to pay anything.
So what we try and do is equip our members with the tools and the
ability to look into that and to stop it, because that's one of the
worst exploitations of workers coming to New Zealand.
But same with supply of goods. You
cannot rely on the bit of paper that you get from someone offshore.
You actually have to go and look. And if you're part of an
organization like ours,
we can go and look for everyone, if you know what I mean.
It doesn't mean that each importer of goods has to go
and do it himself or herself. There can be processes
put in place, and even government with embassies and
high commissions can help with that if they are
required to, if they don't mind.
Thank you very much, both of you. We've reached the end of our time with you this
afternoon, but really appreciate your participation in the process.
Thank you.
And we'll move on now to our next submitter.
We have Wellington Community Justice Project, Sam Collier
speaking on behalf.
Welcome, Sam. We have 10 minutes with you this afternoon.
That includes time for questions. We'll hand over to you now.
Sweet. All good. Yeah. Kia ora koutou. My name is Sam.
I'm a fourth year law student at Te Herenga Waka—Victoria University of Wellington,
representing the Wellington Community Justice Project as part of the law reform
team.
I also have here with me Finn Studd, also part of the Wellington Community
Justice Project as well.
So I might move, I don't think the lighting is the best.
It's okay. We can still see you, still hear you. It's good.
Sweet. All good.
I guess in this submission, I'll cover two key points.
Firstly, the bill's highly lenient offense provisions and kind
of the ad hoc regulatory framework fails to hold some reporting entities
accountable where they have engaged or may be likely to engage in modern slavery
practices.
And secondly, the absence of mandatory due diligence
requirements neutralizes the kind of systemic and kind of abhorrent
nature of modern slavery through creating a kind of illusion of
accountability for some of the companies.
I'd also like to talk about a third point that-The absence of
victim compensatory mechanisms within the bill kind of exacerbates the harm
experienced by some individuals who are most
impacted by modern slavery practices within operations and supply chains.
But yeah, I guess my overall kind of position is it should not proceed as stands,
and the provisions should be subject to amendment or omission
altogether.
Yeah.
Did you have anyone with you there that wanted to speak? Sorry, Sam.
Yes, Finn, but later, if that's all good.
Oh, yeah. No, go for it. Keep going.
Yeah.
So yeah, I guess the first kind of point I would like to talk about was the
provisions fail to hold the commercial entities accountable.
As I talked about in my written submission, the maximum penalty for a reporting
entity
failing to prepare and publish inaccurately
prescribed modern slavery statement is 600,000, which is quite disproportionate to
the annual revenue of many companies.
Obviously, I talked about the top three kind of companies in New Zealand.
Their average annual revenue
it was about 15 billion. So it's like the financial
disincentives are unlikely to meaningfully deter entities and their
directors.
But yeah, also modeled on Australia's Modern Slavery Act, the
bill provides that only entities with a consolidated revenue of at least 100
million can be subject to liability.
So, as I talked about with Gloriavale as one such example, their annual revenue
was about 20.3 million in the last kind of financial year.
But it's not confined to such entities.
Various other companies have been demonstrated to do this.
An example is the now liquidated kiwifruit contracting company, Harry Ng
Horticulture Limited. They were ordered to pay $40,000 in penalties by the
Employment Relations Authority for exploiting migrant workers by failing to
comply with minimum employment standards.
They also required one worker to pay a premium of $23,000 simply to
secure employment.
Another example is Rural Practice Limited, a dairy farming company.
They were ordered to pay $215,000 in penalties by the
Employment Levels Authority after being found to have exploited
three Indonesian migrant workers.
The head compliance
enforcement labor inspector also said the case was illustrative of deliberate and
systemic exploitation.
The other point I would like to talk about, as mentioned, was the ad hoc regulatory
framework. It has been known that such ad hoc kind of
regulation is counter to the rule of law.
I think,
as the bill's preventative purpose is to reduce modern slavery incidents and raise
public awareness, I think that kind of counteracts that
and potentially, yeah, I think the threshold revenue should be
omitted, and until further explanation has been provided for such
definition.
I'll now have Finn to talk about the due diligence requirements.
Sorry.
Hello, so I'm just going to briefly talk about
due diligence. So I think the first main thing is discretion to act with
due diligence might exacerbate the likelihood of corporate
malpractice. So section 9 (2) of the bill
obviously has modern slavery,
requires reporting of modern slavery, but not limited to due
diligence and remediation, but there's no legal obligation
to act with due diligence. It might just seem like a bit of an arbitrary
standard,
possibly. It might also set a precedent that you can
report and continue engaging, but they can be
protected under some, well, I don't know if it's an illusion, but
without as much accountability as you'd probably
like for something of this
caliber.
Next thing is
the international metrics are not proportionate for New Zealand.
So New Zealand obviously has, this bill has
this standard, but other countries are a little bit more
vigilant of, I guess. So like France's Duty of Vigilance law, so it
improves quality of reporting,
in human rights compliance by the 20 largest French companies.
If
we take that the bill's purpose is to raise public awareness of modern
slavery,
it would probably be better to impose a legal obligation on
entities to undertake the due diligence for reporting.
And the Human Rights Commission also recommended, furthermore, despite the Human
Rights Commission's recommendation, there's no ratification of
the International Convention of the Protection of Rights of All Migrant Workers
and Members of Their Families, but over 40 countries are members
of that, and they're signatories, further 20 being
parties.
And so then, I guess lastly, do you want to talk about that?
Yeah. So the last point I talked about in the kind of
summary that I did not talk about in my written submissions was that the absence of
kind of any victim compensatory mechanism within the bill exacerbates the kind
of harm experienced by those most impacted.
So as you can see in the bill, sections 16 to 18
outline the penalties reporting entities may face upon contravention.
However, they do not require the funds to be extended to victims of modern slavery.
Canadian modern slavery legislation similarly fails to provide for any such
mechanism, and a report by the Faculty of Law at McGill
University found that relying on reputational risk by
requiring companies to report on whether they provide compensation
for victims is in fact a poor replacement for a requirement that companies
provide such compensation. So I believe rather than
having the
penalties that companies face being kind of exemplary in nature or
provided to the department for continuing costs, they should be
maybe as such, but also to provide victims with money as well so that
they can
have a proper remedial kind of remediation and just they've felt
justice.
Thank you. Was that all of your points-
Yeah
... to highlight today?
Yes. That was everything.
Thank you both. Look, really appreciate your contribution to this process, your
written and your oral submission. We really appreciate it.
Thank you.
Great.
We'll move on now to Redstone Consulting.
Redstone, we have Brown Makatese
submitting on behalf.
Welcome. We have 10 minutes with you this afternoon, that includes time
for questions, and we'll hand over to you now.
Good afternoon, and thank you for the opportunity to speak this afternoon.
My name is Brown Makatese, and I'm the founder of Redstone
Consulting. It's a business advisory firm.
So when people hear the words modern slavery, they often think of something
extreme, obvious, and far away, something that happens somewhere else in
very dramatic circumstances, and it's not something that happens in New
Zealand. But the point I made in my submission is that it's not
always that obvious. So serious exploitation, to me, can
grow inside work arrangements that look normal from the outside.
It can also sit inside jobs that seem legal, ordinary, and part of
everyday business, and it can happen where people are under pressure,
where they do not feel safe speaking up, and where they depend heavily on the
job to survive, and where responsibility is blurred, so
nobody really takes ownership. And that is why I think we need to stop thinking
about this as only a problem of a few bad actors.
We also need to think about the conditions that allow exploitation to happen in the
first place. So for example,
when workers have very little control over their hours, their bargaining
power, their job security, and very little confidence that they can
complain without losing income, that creates a risk.
And when business models are set up in a way that pushes that responsibility
further and further down through labor hire and contracting
chains or platform-based work, that also creates the risk.
And when everyone in that chain can point to someone else and say, "Well, it's not
really our responsibility," then the exploitation becomes easier to hide.
That, in simple terms, is the concern behind my submission.
So I'm not saying that every insecure job is modern slavery, and I'm not saying
that every business is doing the wrong thing.
What I'm
saying is that some work arrangements, they create the kind of environment where
serious exploitation becomes more likely, and they become
harder to detect or harder for workers to escape.
So if we only step in once the worst harm has already happened, then we have
left it too late. That is why I support a preventative approach.
To me, that means the law should do more than just respond to the damage that's
done, and it should also expect organizations to look
properly where the risks are and take the reasonable steps to reduce
those risks and be accountable for what is happening in their operations and supply
chains.
So because if the law only works after a worker has already been harmed and after
that worker has found the courage and safety to report it,
then the system is putting too much weight on the most vulnerable person in
that situation. And in many cases, that person is exactly the least
able to carry that burden.
So I also want to make the point that reporting on paper is not enough.
A business can publish a statement, they can write a policy, and still leave the
underlying risk untouched. So if New Zealand wants to take this issue
seriously, the answer cannot be just to ask organizations to
describe the problem. The answer has to be to ask them what they're
actually doing about it.
That is why I think a stronger due diligence approach matters, and not because
businesses need punishment for its own sake, but because prevention needs
to be built into the system.
I also think this matters for good businesses.
Responsible employers should not be undercut by business models that rely
on insecurity, confusion, or shifting all the
risk onto its workers.
So a stronger framework is not only about protecting vulnerable people,
it's also about making sure that decent businesses are not competing against
practices that should never have been acceptable in the first place.
So my submission also points that New Zealand is not alone at looking at these
issues.
Other countries have already moved forward with their reporting and
accountability frameworks, and the international direction is clearly toward
expecting more from organizations when it comes to exploitation risk.
So I think we have a real opportunity.
We can choose a weak model that mostly produces paperwork, or we
can choose a model that's more practical, more preventative, and more focused on
the workers.
And the main message I want to leave with the committee today is that if we are
serious about modern slavery and worker
exploitation, that we cannot wait until the harm is obvious, severe, and already
done,
okay? We need a system that looks earlier, acts earlier, and protects people
earlier. So that means clear expectations, real
accountability, safe ways for workers to raise concerns, and
obligations that are strong enough to change behavior and practice, not
just in theory.
Thank you. I welcome any questions.
Thank you very much, Brown. Appreciate your submission, your approach.
We'll move on to our next submitter.
It doesn't appear that we have any questions for you.
But not an indication of a lack of interest, just a very fulsome and comprehensive
submission.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
And next we have Brian
Ward.Welcome,
Brian.
Hello.
Hello. We have five minutes with you this afternoon.
That includes time for questions. We'll hand over to you now.
Okay.
Thanks very much. Well done everybody doing this. It's great.
How familiar is the committee with B Corp
certification?
Can I just ask the general question, just roughly, without asking everybody
individually? Is there a familiarity with B Corp?
Sorry. Yes. Yep, you've just got us nodding.
Most of us are on mute.
Oh, okay. That's why. Great. I'll carry on.
Yes.
I'll just give you a couple of facts.
USA have 36 million companies,
only 2,500 are B Corp certified.
New Zealand has 754,000 companies, only 180 of them are
B Corp certified.
So, talk about
open to unethical behavior.
The USA Walk Free Global Slavery Index is four,
and the New Zealand Walk Free Global Slavery Index is 1.8,
so we're better on that front, too.
B Corp reduces the need to have to tax to pay for
company externalities resulting from clean-up, health and safety, and living wage,
for example. And B Corp has initiatives
similar to what the EU are working on,
so there's an alignment there between B Corp and the EU provisions.
One thing that came up from what I
listened to earlier was,
how can whistleblower provisions be included
in this legislation?
It seemed to me that there's a need for that.
Anyway, just back to
the specific
focus I have in my submission was, I believe the focus should be
on importers and known unethical products.
That's where the focus should be when the energy is on this is
done.
And in my example,
we could well be making
the same material that is made in China, that is
used-- We know most solar panels have forced
labor or
slave labor. We have unethical practices in the manufacture
of our solar panels. Most of them coming into New Zealand will have an element of
that, and we don't know much about it.
My company is looking to make the same stuff in New Zealand,
but using ethical and modern practices with health and
safety. We can't compete with slave or forced labor.
I will make a point that some companies in this game
protect their IP
fiercely, and they won't let anybody near their operation.
So,
there's that hurdle to get over, too.
But
high purity quartz technical knowledge largely resides in the Northern Hemisphere,
and we don't know much about it here, but we can certainly
have input into it from the point of view of
helping the industry clean up its act.
And there's a significant opportunity for this and other things
related to that to be carried out in New Zealand.
So, I'll just conclude by saying
the focus
for me should be on importers and known
unethical products. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Brian. Just a quick question from myself.
When you said that the agent or the organizations
refuse to let people in to see, are you sort of indicating
that
even if companies were going through their process,
auditing their supply chain, there'd be some of their suppliers that they wouldn't
be able to tell one way or the other?
Well,
in general, this stuff travels around the world
before it comes to us-
Yes
... a bit like some of those other products.
They go from one country to another to get this and that done, and then they end up
in a solar panel and then they come to-
Mm
... New Zealand. So, some of the earlier
purification techniques are highly secretive,
and the companies, they've got a monopoly on a lot of it, on this
stuff-
Mm
... and
for IP reasons, they won't let anybody in there.
Now, I don't know how much of that is
involved as unethical behavior in amongst that-
Right
... but I'm just flagging it.
Right. Okay. No, I really appreciate that. Thank you. Very helpful. Thanks, Brian.
Appreciate your participation in the process-
Okay. Thank you
... and your submission. Thank you.
We'll move on now to our next submitter. We have Jackie St.
John and Kylie Stevens speaking on behalf of Oceana Gold.
Welcome, Jackie. We have 10 minutes with you this afternoon.
That includes time for questions.
I can see there might be a flash-
Sorry
... of someone beside you.
Perhaps that's Kylie.
Having some technical difficulties.
That's okay.
Sorry. We can see you, but we cannot hear you.
Ah.
And you can see me, but you cannot see Kylie-
... which is a bit of a problem.
You see the apparition of Kylie at times.
One moment. I'll see if I canChange the
background
It's most im-
There's a little better. No
You have to take away the blue
We can go with no background. One moment, please
Background blur, that's your issue, but you can't hear me tell you that, so.
How's that?
There we go.
Can you hear us now?
We still cannot hear you. Wonder-
Okay.
Try us again.
I wonder if Clark can message you to just say it doesn't matter necessarily
as long as we can hear you,
which we can.
Goodness me.
Maybe I'll speak again to see if you can now hear me.
Unfortunately, we can't hear you, and I'm very sorry about this because I'm
trying to change
micro and see whether that ...
So the committee secretariat has hopefully just let you know that we can hear
you, so if you can go for it, that's okay.
I'm working on that. Can hear something.
Vaguely heard you then, I think.
Oh, okay. Testing.
Testing.
Thank you.
Oh, there we go.
Sorry about that.
No, that's okay. Really, you only have to hear us
to understand the-
Just-
... restrictions which you already know, which is that you've got 10 minutes.
It includes time for questions and then hopefully some questions at the end.
Wonderful.
We'll hand over to you now.
Thank you. We'll rip into it.
Kia ora. Called Jacqui St John, toku ingoa.
Legal manager for OceanaGold, and with me is my colleague Kylie Stevens.
Thanks for the opportunity to present to you today.
OceanaGold is New Zealand's largest gold producer, with
operations at Macraes in Otago and Waihi in the
Waikato, both of which have operated for over
36 years. We're part of the larger OceanaGold
Corporation group, a multinational gold mining company with
operations in New Zealand, the United States, and the
Philippines, and we're listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange and more recently,
the New York Stock Exchange.
OceanaGold supports the intent of this bill.
The elimination of modern slavery and forced labor in global supply
chains is a critical objective and one that OceanaGold is
already actively engaged in addressing.
As a group, OceanaGold has been producing modern slavery
statements since 2020 to achieve compliance with
both Canadian and Australian modern slavery laws.
The statements outline the measures that we have implemented to
identify, assess, mitigate modern slavery risks
across our global operations and supply chains.
We could provide you with an example of a modern slavery statement if you were
interested to receive one.
Our submission is about ensuring that the New Zealand regime
achieves transparency and accountability in a way that
is effective but practical and aligned with
established international reporting frameworks.
We've made recommendations that we consider will improve the bill,
and Kylie will introduce some of those to you.
Our primary submission is to ensure that the New Zealand reporting regime is
consistent with existing international reporting
regimes. We think the bill should, one, allow reporting
entities to report by reference to their own financial year.
That is not the single prescribed date for all entities being a non-government
entity reporting period of 1st of April to 31st of
March. OceanaGold modern slavery reporting draws from
governance, risk, procurement, legal sustainability, and
finance processes that are structured around our existing financial
reporting cycle of a calendar year.
Reporting to a different period would add complexity, additional work
burden, and extra reporting. Aligning to our existing
reporting period would enable an easier bedding in on
reporting.
Two, recognize and align with equivalent overseas reporting
and allow group-level reporting, including permitting
reliance on modern slavery statements prepared under the Australian
and Canadian frameworks where they contain materially equivalent
information.
This reflects how multinational businesses actually manage modern slavery
risks and would eliminate unnecessary duplication
and additional costs to reporting entities in having to create a bespoke New
Zealand report.
Section 9 of the bill signals that there may be a mandatory prescribed form
for statements. We ask that flexibility be provided for
entities that are already reporting globally to depart from any
prescribed form.
And three, include an appropriate transition period to enable
entities to establish systems, governance, and reporting
frameworks in an orderly and effective way.
Currently, reports will be expected within six months of the end of the first
reporting period. That is currently 31st of March.
We suggest a change to allow a full reporting period to
elapse once the act comes into effect, with reporting six months
later.
Moving to a different submission point, OceanaGold is also
interested to ensure that the proposed enforcement settings in the
bill are proportionate to the obligations imposed by the bill.
Our preference is that Section 17, director and officer criminal
liability is removed from the bill.
However, if it is to remain, it's very important that New Zealand
enforcement provisions are appropriately calibrated.
We'd recommend a staged approach to implementation and
a more enabling enforcement toolkit to allow a hierarchy of
responses, ranging from warning to infringement
penalty to finally, prosecution.Like the
Australian and Canadian regimes, the New Zealand regime could
recognize and provide and encourage good faith
efforts to comply and provide an opportunity to correct
inaccurate reporting, particularly in the early stages of the
regime. We consider director and officer liability
should be
reserved for more serious misconduct, not just procedural
non-compliance with reporting obligations.
So serious misconduct would be failures to report,
repeated non-compliances, or deliberately misleading
statements.
Currently, Section 17B creates a criminal offense
where a director or officer knew or could
reasonably be expected to have known that the offense
was to be or was being committed and failed to take all reasonable
steps to prevent or stop it.
This is quite a far-reaching provision when a global supply chain is
being considered.
We ask that consideration be given to introducing a defense if
a director or officer can demonstrate that they have taken
reasonable steps to prevent offending.
This would cover a scenario where reporting procedures have been
implemented and maintained, but the director was not
reasonably aware of specific offending or the
probability of it occurring.
So in conclusion, OceanaGold supports the intent of the Modern Slavery
Bill, submits that alignment with established international
frameworks would result in a more effective and practical
regime for globally operating businesses like ours.
Alignment will enhance transparency, ensure that New Zealand's
regulatory framework is credible and capable of
delivering its intended outcomes.
Thank you for your time. We are available to answer questions if there's any
time for any.
Thank you very much.
Marginal, but we have one question, so we'll try and make that one quick.
Thank you.
Thank you so much for your submission.
Just really quickly, just wanting to clarify two points in your submission.
So I got the point around the transitional provisions, which I know is in your
written submission too. But just to clarify,
so at the moment it would be six months, but you're asking for it to be a full
additional reporting year on top of that?
Yeah.
So the first report would be due-
18 months, effectively
Yeah, 18 months
After the implementation of the act to enable a full cycle of
gathering of information to be available to the business
and also to enable reporting systems and mechanisms to
be established and set up for those who don't already have them.
Thanks. And just the other thing was in relation to the
penalties. We understand this is something that Australia is looking
at. So in terms of the comparative model that you
suggested, would you imagine that
warnings to start with would be the first step,
but envisioning a regime that did have penalties in place like-
Yes, absolutely
... we understand Australia is moving to.
Absolutely. So a hierarchy of
proportionate response, and we see that in other
legislation, and it could be mirrored here.
Thanks.
Thank you.
Thank you both, and really appreciate your submission, both written and
oral.
Thank you for your understanding.
And making your technology work.
I had technical difficulties.
All good. We got there. Brilliant. Thank you.
We'll move on now to our next submission.
We have Rebekah Armstrong and Evelyn Painter representing World
Vision New Zealand.
Kia ora. My name is Evelyn Painter.
I am 12 years old. I am a World Vision advocacy
ambassador, and I'm here today to represent the voices of children and
young people across Aotearoa, New Zealand, who have spoken up about modern slavery.
At World Vision's Annual Youth Conference, we worked alongside young people aged 10
to 18 to learn about modern slavery and the risks hidden in the products
we buy every day.
Together, we helped collate
942 submissions to Parliament in support of this Modern
Slavery Bill.
Scarlet from Glen Eden Intermediate wrote, "Child labor shouldn't be
supported. Modern slavery is horrible, and it is not fair."
More than 12 million children are trapped in modern slavery,
one in four victims globally. This is an issue
that children and young people in Aotearoa feel
deeply. For many young people, modern slavery has become
personal, through stories, campaigns, research, and the voices of
people who are too often unheard.
One young person, Vadika from Mount Albert Grammar School,
wrote,
"That person sitting on their shared mattress on the ground, working 12 hours a
day and getting only a few cents could have very well been me.
That immigrant who was promised a better life but got exploited instead could
have been my mom,
and that shatters my heart.
Treat humans like humans, not machines.
I don't want my products to be made by someone who is suffering."
Some of the key messages I heard were a need for greater accountability from
businesses, the impacts of exploitation, and the belief that all humans deserve
to be treated fairly and with dignity.
Many of the young people who made submissions will spend decades living with the
decisions made here
as consumers, workers, business leaders, voters, and members of their
communities. But this bill is not only about the future, it is about
now. Any modern slavery legislation passed by this Parliament
must recognize that children are among the most vulnerable to exploitation,
and that their experiences, rights, and protection needs to be at the center
of law.
Young people across Aotearoa have written letters, signed petitions, met with
MPs, learnt about supply chains, and made submissions because they believe
their voices can make a differenceThis bill reaching Parliament has shown
that advocacy does work, and the next step is
ensuring that this parliamentary process continues to listen to children and young
people, not as a symbolic gesture, but because their voices
make this legislation stronger. Another young person,
Bianca from Michael Park School, wrote, "The law should protect people,
if not perfectly, then to the best of its ability."
That is what we are asking for today, a law that takes exploitation seriously,
protects children, brings hidden harm to light, and keeps improving
over time. We ask Parliament to keep this bill child-focused,
to keep listening to the voices of the children and young people, and to strengthen
this legislation so it reflects the values we aspire to as
a country: dignity, fairness, and freedom. Thank you.
Kia ora tatou. Thanks, Evelyn. I'm Rebecca, head of advocacy and
justice. And yeah, we just wanted to show how much support there is
for modern slavery legislation from our tamariki across New Zealand.
We were hoping to hand over some physical submissions today, because we've
got handwritten submissions that are really beautiful and amazing, and we
are putting a reel on Instagram, so we would love you to look at that.
But World Vision, we're making a
submission today on behalf of 2,500 New
Zealanders, and those 1,000 children that Evelyn
referenced.
We had a call to strengthen the bill in three areas, and
I won't go into major detail around this because I know that you
understand it. But the first is to ask businesses
to take action when they find modern slavery.
I think there's two schools of thought around this, around mandatory due diligence.
One is to phase it in over time, and the other is to introduce
it from the outset. We would say that because there is convergence
towards mandatory modern slavery due diligence, that we're seeing
calls for it in Australia and the EU, it would make sense for
New Zealand to introduce this from the outset.
The second point that we make is that businesses need really strong
guidance, and this area of law needs to be resourced.
We've found in talking to businesses that the guidance around how to
report to the
Act can be as valuable as the Act itself.
There's been some talk about compliance costs and the difficulty
for business in reporting. It doesn't have to be that way.
I think with correct guidance, correct resourcing,
New Zealand entities will have everything that they need to report to this
bill in a meaningful way. It won't be arduous or difficult,
but we need that resourcing from the outset.
And in particular, our submission references that
there are particular goods and products that are more at high
risk of modern slavery than others.
And so we talk about a high-risk and proportionate approach
to addressing modern slavery, but also providing guidance
around what some of those high sectors are and could be.
And finally, we say that victim survivors should be at the heart of
this law. This is what the law is for.
And so there are other laws like the Crimes Act
definitions, and there's the Trafficking in Persons National Action
Plan that's being created at the moment.
We're saying that there needs to be really strong policy coherence between this
Modern Slavery Bill and other acts that are taking place so that
victim survivors of modern slavery can access justice, they can
have remediation when needed, but more importantly, when
they do need assistance, it's easy for them to
find it.
Currently, it's really difficult if you're a victim survivor of modern slavery in
New Zealand to get the help that you need because everything
is
interdepartmental, and we think that needs to change. Thank you.
Thank you both. Evelyn, can I just say at first, I would absolutely have not
guessed you were 12 years old. That was incredible.
I think that was a mistake, actually. She's 20 years old.
Oh my gosh, okay.
The nerves set in. I heard that as well, and I was thinking-
You're still 12. I was going to say, wow.
Oh, well, still very impressive as a 20-year-old.
Regardless, I can imagine-
I can't believe I didn't even notice
... you knowing anything about it. Wow.
Oh, we can all have a laugh. Hey, good question from Camilla Belich.
Thank you both so much, and thanks, Evelyn, for your opening words.
And I'm sure you are manifesting some of the people that will be helped by
this type of legislation in other countries by mentioning younger
children as well. So just wanted to acknowledge that and the huge number of
submissions that World Vision has got together for this bill,
and also your assistance with us, Rebecca.
I know that World Vision, along with other NGOs, has been really pivotal
in making sure that this legislation got to the stage where it was today.
And I just wanted to ask around due diligence, because
I know you've brought that up in your submission, and it's a theme that you
may have seen some of the other submissions today.
I just wanted to just ask you a bit in terms of
if we were able to add this to the bill, what that would
look like, as opposed to what's currently there at the moment.
And just if you had any reflections on other comments that people have made around
supply chain definitions or how that would work together.
Sure. So at the moment, in some
ways, this law is stronger than other jurisdictions because it does
identify what due diligence is, and it does ask
entities to follow a process of disclosure around due diligence.
But the issue is that this is still a disclosure and
transparency-based law. So it asks you to
disclose and transparently put on the register when you find incidences
of modern slavery. It also asks you to
say what you have potentially done to remediate this, but it doesn't put
any onus on you to actually do anything about it.
So,
the due diligence moves to taking that action, to actually
working with the incident of modern slavery, working with the people
affected, and actually closing that gap.
So I think that's really important. That's the difference.
At the same time, we say in our submission, transparency-only laws
aren't-... you know, not effective, and I can see the
thinking around a phased approach.
At the same time, why not go there first and foremost, especially
because it is a theme that we're hearing across many
companies are calling for it. Around the definition of supply chain,
it's an interesting one, and I haven't heard all the submissions on this.
I just think, though, that we need to be careful because
potentially having a definition of supply chain takes away from the
intent of the act, which is around,
well, due diligence is around identifying your most high-risk
products and focusing on that proportionately.
And so, I feel like potentially supply chain could actually
widen the scope and take away from the
change that we're wanting businesses to really make, which is really
identifying those high-risk parts of their supply chain and addressing those.
I feel like supply chain is just a little bit more wide open, if that makes sense.
Thank you very much, both of you, for your participation in the process.
Thanks.
It's been really helpful, a really insightful submission as well, so
thanks.
Thank you.
Yeah, we're happy to receive those written-
Yes
... submissions still, as well, if you wish.
Awesome.
We can, yeah.
We'll accept supplementary-
Thank you
... no problem. If you can get in contact with the clerk of the committee, that's
fine.
Excellent. Thank you so much.
Thank you.
Brilliant, thank you. We'll move on now to our next submitter.
We have Yvonne Thompson.
Yvonne, hopefully you've accepted the
request to become a host/panelist,
and then you'll be able to jump on the
screen with us.
Yvonne, it appears you're ready to go.
We just need you to turn your camera on
and
your
microphone,
and then we'll be good to go.
Hopefully you can hear us.
Yvonne, I can see you there,
if you want to just unmute your
microphone and turn your camera on.
Most importantly the microphone, at least if we can hear you.
Perhaps what we could-
Mute. Hello.
Ah, yes, we've got you there now, Yvonne.
Right.
I can hear you.
Look, am I live already?
You are, yes.
Oh, right. Well, look, I'm so flustered now
trying to get on, so forgive me for that.
That's okay, Yvonne.
But
I felt responding to the
modern-day slavery bill was an
opportunity for us to come together as a
united country
and put in policy on behalf of our
children, our elderly, and our
vulnerable, because they are not
always in a position, and they're not, because of their
frailties and their youth and what have you, to be
answerable for themselves. So we need to
set in place systems and services and
process so that we can advocate and
be there as services, et cetera, on their
behalf. Because our children
nowadays, and even our youth, and our
vulnerable and elderly, feel unsafe.
They're uncertain. We don't see children, and
I noticed that, in that I sort of, for whatever
reason, I
left a wonderful lifestyle because I wasn't happy and
satisfied because I felt, how come I've got
so much and so many other people that I've grown
up with have got so little? So I went
about things in my way and I ended up in
localities
where I was identifying with
the relevance of what I was trying to pursue.
And I would meet people, and they would tell me their
circumstances.
Hearing stories about children being hung in
garages,
growing up knowing abuse throughout my life,
and seeing and hearing about it in this modern day.
And I thought, it's not right. How can we
come together because we all love our children.
We all know that we admire and respect our older
people, and that we are of an age
now where we're looking to getting older if we're not
already. And we need to be sensible and then
address this sort of from a
perspective that we're looking
towards a future.
We're inA future
at the moment, but we're not sort of progressing forward.
We're not looking forward enough.
And I heard
Pauline Hanson from Australia
speak the other day, and she's echo-- Well, I
echo her words. She's been in, well, I call
it the business. All you people that are in parliament, you're in the business,
and you should know your stuff. But I think it's lacking
because when you get to your level, your parliamentary
level,
you're busy advocating on everything, on the
infrastructure and all this sort of thing, and the people that
are advocating on behalf of us people
are struggling to be heard. And I'm thinking, I'm
really pleased. I didn't know you had this sort of
being able to put through hearings and listen to other people's
views. So I'm going to listen with interest.
And I just sort of feel to say any
more would probably, it'd confuse myself
and confuse other people because you get on
subjects that are important to you.
I'm waiting to be a grandmother-
Oh
...
for my first grandchild. Yet I've got a girlfriend that's got
13 grandchildren. So what's going to become
of our grandbabies?
Mm.
What do we want for them? And
more so because I have looked at my generationally,
because I'm in my 70s, generationally
speaking,
we're the last ones,
and there's four generations behind me-
Mm
... truth be told. And I'm-
Thank you
... yes, I'm thinking about this, and I'm thinking, well,
if we can put it in place now
and get all on the same page about it, then
hopefully we will reap the benefit
of seeing the rewards being made with our tamariki and
our young ones and our youth.
Thank you, Yvonne. I really do appreciate that and your passion as well.
And good luck with the grandchild on the way.
We really appreciate your participation in the process and good luck with listening
to the remaining submitters as well.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Do you have any questions?
No, unfortunately we don't have time for any questions, but we really appreciate-
Oh, b*****s
... your participation.
Sorry I talk too much.
That's okay.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Yvonne.
Thank you, everybody.
Bye.
Bye-bye.
We'll move on now to our next submitter.
We have got The Warehouse Group up next.
Am I on? Can you hear me?
Oh, yes. We can hear you. We can see you.
I'm not sure if you've got anyone else joining you.
All right.
Okay, brilliant. All right. Well, we've got 10 minutes with you.
That includes time for questions, and I'm sure we will have questions for you, so
please account for that.
Okay, great.
We'll hand over now.
Great. So I'll just give a bit of a sort of top-line view from us.
So kia ora, thank you for your opportunity to speak this afternoon.
So I'm Phil Cumming. I'm General Manager for Sustainability and Ethical Sourcing at
The Warehouse Group.
Obviously, I'm sure you guys know who we are.
We've obviously got three brands, The Warehouse, Warehouse Station, and Nova
Leeming, and serve millions of Kiwis every year.
We've had an ethical sourcing program in place since 2004,
probably one of the first major brands in New Zealand to have this.
We weren't the first, but I think we were one of the first, and we've been publicly
reporting on its performance around the program
since 2017.
We've long supported the introduction of legislation in this space for quite a
while, and we signed the open letter to the last government with
Walk Free, Trade Aid, and World Vision, and we also responded to the MB
consultation in
2022.
I was also personally part of the British Retail Consortium cross-retail
group that advocated for the UK's Modern Slavery Act in 2015, and
I've prepared statements under UK and California regimes.
Look, modern slavery is one of the most serious human rights violations of our
time. It's concealed by design, hard to find.
Some brands have stepped up, others haven't.
This bill will definitely help level the playing field.
But to make it work in practice, we do have some recommendations.
We're also very conscious of the economic climate.
Obviously, businesses, households are under real cost pressure at the moment, and
compliance costs need to be proportionate.
And I have to sort of take some learnings from the climate disclosures regime,
where world-leading and well-intended, but less than two years in, came under a
lot of fire. Directors' liability settings in particular were seen as
too onerous. Some complained of seven-figure sums around compliance
costs, guidance arrived late, and in some cases actually even now is still
outstanding.
Our ask is that New Zealand is a fast follower.
There's more than a decade of overseas experience to draw on, and then there's a
few areas I just want to kind of pull out. First is on reporting mechanics.
There's three practical things that we sort of picked up in the bill.
One is around aligning reporting periods with financial year,
as Australia does. The bill's fixed cycle appears to penalize any brands
which without a March balance date.
Permit group-level reporting, ours is a case in point, we've got three brands.
I think it probably wouldn't be helpful to have three separate statements.
And ideally allow mutual recognition of statements prepared
under comparable regimes as well.
Second area is around setting up for successWe think an
independent anti-slavery commissioner should be appointed now.
Both Australia and UK have one. Having one in place for the first reporting
cycle could be useful, not least when while the regime is bedding in,
there's going to be loads of questions, what have you.
Guidance is also really important to getting it in place.
There's loads of material to draw from, whether it's Australia and UK, OECD,
UN, ILO, and then where we align with peer regimes, that guidance is
ready from day one. Where we diverge, the registrar will have to fill that gap and
experience again with climate disclosures where there are brand-new disclosures,
never been done before. That does show how slow that can
be. On liability, the bill does
impose personal liability on directors.
Australia doesn't, and I don't believe Australia is even planning to do so under
their reforms. I think they're just looking at introducing civil penalties at an
entity level. Again, with
climate
experience, I think that could result in very defensive boiler plate disclosure,
which wouldn't really would be helpful.
We think the liability provision should be removed and add a safe harbor in
for disclosures made in good faith.
I think, the assumption should be that brands are acting in good faith
and are not complicit. And I think we've got a question as
to how the bill aligns with the Crimes Amendment Bill,
and sort of issues that are picked up here versus overseas.
The fourth area, which is a biggie for us, is around not running ahead of
Australia.
Bill requires disclosure of modern slavery incidents.
From what I can see, this doesn't define incidents.
It defines modern slavery by reference to the Crimes Act.
So if an incident is intended to mean criminal offense, only a court can determine
that. I'm sure that probably wasn't the case, but that's how we potentially read
it. What we as brands in reality identify
is what we call indicators of modern slavery, so things like passport retention,
recruitment fee debt, wages withheld, restricted movement.
So obviously we investigate, we engage and where possible, we seek
to remediate.
So we do recommend removing the incident disclosure regime, at least for now,
and align with Australia. And if they
move, then absolutely move fast. The
definitions around due diligence and operations and supply chains
also need some moment. One, it differs from
international guidance, and operations and supply chains isn't actually defined in
there. Just to be clear, we
don't argue against due diligence.
We're sympathetic to the international direction of travel on that.
It's just going ahead of Australia, our closest peer, is the same.
I wouldn't want this bill to come under the same criticism as the climate regime
did. I think that would be unfortunate.
And the fifth and final gap is around offshore gaps.
Direct-to-consumer platforms like Temu, Shein, take a significant
share of New Zealand consumer spend.
The bill, as written, appears unlikely to capture them.
Compliance costs will fall on New Zealand retailers whilst those players
overseas will
get none. So other regimes have identified the same gap, and I do
think that's one area where New Zealand shouldn't wait,
notwithstanding my fast follower comments, I think there's no reason for
New Zealand to wait on that. So to sum up, we do support the bill.
Our recommendations around making it work in practice, I think it, done well,
should help drive more responsible sourcing practices here, level the
playing field, particularly amongst businesses that are doing very little, and
ideally, obviously, deliver better outcomes for vulnerable workers,
both here and overseas. But let's learn the lessons of the climate regime
is our big ask.
Thank you. Happy to take questions.
Thank you, Phil. Really appreciate it.
And you've raised a number of things that we've heard from other submitters as well
and really helpful context. Can I just ask a quick question?
Would you be going through this process as a group,
rather than your separate companies, being the Warehouse, New Leaming, et
cetera?
Yeah. Ideally, we would
want to prepare one statement covering the whole group,
not least from a reporting, we tend to do one report.
We've got a lot of the information, the data's the same,
policies are the same.
So ideally, yeah. Ideally, we would.
Hence the comments around
the ask to be able to have a statement covering a group rather than
individual brands. Obviously, that might differ by different organizations, but
having that ability would be helpful.
Yeah, and appreciate your point about the online
stores as well. It's something I raised early on, that we do need to have a think
about how we treat that.
A question from Camilla Belich.
Yeah, I was just going to ask about what you suggested, and I just was having
an extra check of your submission, but just in terms of the
overseas companies, what would you suggest that New
Zealand put in place?
I mean, I appreciate that that's difficult because
obviously, maybe the sort of
visibilities or the controls might be different, but just
the transparency expectation should be the same and then
effectively get judged in the same way as everyone else.
And so ideally, they should be able to provide, be
expected to provide the same disclosures if they want to bring in
overseas. I believe the
EU are slightly doing that, but also, I think
they're also requiring,
my understanding, organizational representatives to be based there or at
least there is an organizational presence.
Obviously, I'm not suggesting that New Zealand goes down that road.
So I'm not for one moment suggesting this is easy, and I don't think many
countries have gotten answers to that.
But I think just to let them off the hook, full stop, isn't right either.
I think the expectation should be that they are
expected to disclose in the same way as everyone else is
that's caught under this regime in New Zealand.
Thank you, Phil. And just a final question from Pamjit Parmar.
Kia.
Thanks, Phil. In your submission, you talk about the cost for
compliance and looking at benefits for that
cost. So what does that mean in terms of
practically for consumers? What does that cost look like?
Well, there shouldn't be-- I think the comments
around costs are more around if we're running ahead of other
regimes
and where the guidance is not clear and the
implementation is not clear. So,
our comments there is more around
making sure that,
there's the 10 years, over a decade's worth of experience overseas for New Zealand
to draw on. It can be a fast follower in this space,
and where obviously Australia and other
jurisdictions move on things like due diligence, New Zealand
can absolutely step in because obviously, and benefit from that.
So our comment was more around making sure that New Zealand doesn't run ahead
of introducing
requirements, particularly on due diligence and instant disclosure, which aren't in
place in Australia. Only really relatively new and coming
into play in Europe and actually Europe's own regime hasn't come into effect
yet fully either. So it's more from that
perspective. I think if
brands are doing
what they should be doing and doing
the right thing and sourcing responsibly, there shouldn't really be a huge
cost to then pass on. It's just because there's lots of experience.
Actually, the more brands are asking these questions, the better.
Thank you very much, Phil. Really appreciate it.
An incredibly helpful submission for us.
Fantastic. Thank you very much.
Brilliant.
Bye-bye.
Okay, we're just going to skip ahead a submitter just because we're waiting for one
of our submitters to join online. So we next have Tuhana
BHR, and Tanya Powere. Hopefully,
Tanya Powere and Brent Wilton, David
Rutherford together.
Kia ora.
Welcome. Thank you very much for being agile. We appreciate it.
We've got 10 minutes with you this afternoon.
That includes time for questions.
And just checking, are you expecting Brent and-- oh, yes, here we go.
There's Brent, and I'm assuming, David will be on imminently.
So if you'd like to, you're welcome to get going, and we will
come back-
Not hold you up
... with questions at the end.
Thank you. So good afternoon, and thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
We broadly support the Modern Slavery Bill, and
well done to the government for cross-party support to get us to this point.
That's amazing. However, without a focus on practical
action and behavior change, the risk is we simply
create additional reporting rather than better outcomes for vulnerable
workers, which is the point of the bill.
So kia ora, my name is Tanya Powere.
I'm a Marlborough-based wine grape grower and General Manager of my
family's vineyard services business, employing currently
170 people. Back in 2020, as then
CEO, I started the restructure of New Zealand Ethical
Employers to support SME, small medium employers, in
understanding and applying globally recognized human rights
frameworks, including the UNGPs and OECD
Responsible Business Conduct Standards, alongside David Rutherford
and Brent Wilton from Tuhana Business and Human Rights.
Through that work, I've seen firsthand that while transparency and
reporting are important, they don't by themselves
improve outcomes for workers.
Real change, when employers and businesses understand their
responsibilities and change their behaviors, do.
Human rights due diligence is the process of identifying risks to
people. Those are the harms to people that businesses cause or
contribute, taking action to prevent or address those
risks and checking what it is that you're doing is
actually making a difference. That shifts the focus from
reporting on problems to actively managing them to
reduce the harm. So two key points there, behavior change
is required for better outcomes for workers, and employers
need support and education to understand what to do and how to demonstrate that
change. So we've provided a fairly detailed written submissions,
and
those are read, so we now welcome questions from the committee.
Right. Thank you. We have a question from Camilla Belich first.
Thank you, for coming along today and for your extensive written submission.
I just note in your written submission you talk about improving worker voice, and I
just wanted to know what suggestions you would
make, to be able to do that.
Brent, did you want to take this, or do you want me to?
Yeah, no, that's fine. Thank you, Tanya, and thank you very much for the
opportunity to speak. Worker voice is a
tool of due diligence. It's not the only tool of due diligence, and I
think that's important to understand.
Worker voice can be pretty scary to some people because going out and asking people
what they think is never something anyone does willingly at times.
What we've done with NZEE is put in place a very simple process
where every year there is a survey that goes out that asks
workers to respond to a series of questions, which we elaborated with Tanya and
her team along with Ulula, which is an internationally recognized worker
voice platform, in order to assess progress over
time. And I think the way in which you make it more widely
acceptable and widely used is to remove the fear
factorA lot of people, when they look at these issues like modern
slavery and other human rights abuses, are concerned that if they look, they'll
find something, and if they find something, they'll be accused.
So we have to remove that fear factor.
So the survey that the NZE undertakes has done
that. It takes time. You have to build that trust in the system.
So in 2022, when the first survey was done, the response rate was quite low,
27%. Last year when it was done, it was up to 70%.
So the issue of repetition is important, getting people to engage
constantly in a process. Because modern slavery is not an
issue you address on one day and forget about for the rest of the year.
Like other human rights due diligence, it's an ongoing process that you
build confidence with people over time.
And the worker voice, though, is so important, and the number of people today
have suggested the need for greater worker participation in any of the
processes that the bill puts forward.
The worker voice does give you that opportunity to engage with your own
staff confidentially, to raise to the surface
issues which you may not be aware of.
So your question and how you create those questions is very
important. But what we've seen from the response rate has been
very positive over time.
But it does take that time. We're dealing with SMEs, which are in
many instances extremely small businesses,
so they're dealing with a lot of other issues on a daily basis.
So NZE's work over this time with its newsletter and other
outreach has continued to push to people's minds
human rights and modern slavery issues as a key part of doing
business, to access markets, to access other
people they want to do business with.
So by making it more visible as a tool in human rights
due diligence would be an important step in letting people
know that it is a safe process to use, so
long as the condemnation doesn't initially follow.
The cutting and running that the UNGPs speak against
is very important here. You've got to stay and engage.
So if there is a problem, you have to work with the people to correct it
so it doesn't happen again. Because with respect, my experience
over 30 years in this area is ignorance is the biggest problem
we have, not bad-
And if I can just add in a practical aspect to that as well, is
that it's not just about complaint handling.
So from a business perspective, when you open up and create a
channel for workers to have a voice, you are identifying risks
before they become problems, which is key.
And you're actually, when you close the loop, when you go out and ask the
questions, once you get that information back and then you respond back to
workers with, "This is what we've heard, and these are the ways and the things that
we've identified, and this is how we're going to fix it," it builds trust.
Again, it's
a communication tool that can build trust between the employer
and the workers that not only have you provided the service to hear our
voices through this way, but you've actually heard us, and
that can strengthen that relationship, which is sometimes there is a power
imbalance, but this is one way that you can strengthen that trust.
Right. Thank you very much. Did we have any further questions
from the committee?
Great. Thank you so much, both of you. We really appreciate that perspective.
It's very helpful for us, especially given the experience of
Te Hana BHR as well.
Thank you.
Good luck.
Thank you. Okay.
Look, committee, just waiting for a little bit of advice here.
We've got our 2:15
submitter is not online.
So we might take a brief break
so that we can catch back up. Although,
Clark, I do just see that Jane Kerrigan is online.
So perhaps do we just want to give Jane the opportunity,
if they wanted to submit now?
Yeah, if she's available, we can try and see if
she's happy to come online.
And then we could take a break after that.
Seems we're a little bit ahead,
which is always good. Oh, Jane, welcome.
I saw you there and I thought you may not want to go away and come back again.
No, that is good.
Oh, welcome, Jane. We've got five minutes with you, and that does
include time for questions. So we'll hand over to you now, and feel free to
take us through your highlights, and
we'll come back for-
Terrific.
Great.
Tēnā koe, Chair and members.
First, I congratulate the Parliament on the
intent underscored by this bill.
Existing laws have plainly failed to expose and prevent exploitation in
many settings. And to that end, I'd like to particularly acknowledge the salient
submissions of many of my predecessors.
That said, I submit there's an uncomfortable reality that this committee
cannot ignore. While considering this bill, the Crown is
simultaneously advancing the Disability Support Services Bill,
legislation whose purpose is to remove employment rights
recently confirmed, not created, by the Supreme Court for
family carers of profoundly disabled New Zealanders.
For more than three decades, successive governments have progressively withdrawn
disability supports and services and replaced them with an expectation
that families will provide the labor required to keep disabled people
safe and supported in the community.
The Crown knows these carers simply cannot stop.
They cannot resign. They cannot walk away.
The Crown also knows that in many, if not most cases, there is
nobody else available to provide the care and nowhere
suitable for their family member to go.
That is precisely why this issue belongs before this
committee. The Modern Slavery Bill recognizes that
exploitation is not confined to criminal gangs, locked doors,
or physical restraints. Its concepts of exploitation and
servitude recognizes that labor can be extracted where a
person cannot realistically cease providing it because of the
consequences that would follow. Exploitation exists where
dependency, vulnerability, and unequal power remove
any genuine freedom of choice. That description
reflects the reality faced by many family carers in New
ZealandToday,
the Crown determines eligibility for disability support.
The Crown determines funding. The Crown determines the level of support
required, often acknowledging that is 24/7.
The Crown controls access to services, audits arrangements,
and controls the entire system. Yet when carers seek
recognition under the law already in place, namely the
Employment Relations Act, the Crown denies responsibility.
The Crown has sought to portray the Supreme Court decision recently handed
down in Fleming as judicial interference with
government policy. That is plain wrong.
The Supreme Court did not interfere with the policy.
It simply applied the law to the reality of the arrangements the Crown had
created and operated. The court confirmed that government policy,
like any other policy, remains subject to the law.
I note in this case, that law
was the Employment Relations Act.
The Supreme Court did nothing more than uphold the rule of
law in that matter. The principle is also central to this
bill. The law must look beyond labels,
structures,
and legal fictions to the reality of power, control,
dependency, and work. When the Supreme Court did exactly that, the
Crown's response has been not compliance.
Its response is to introduce a Disability Support Services
bill to remove the legal consequences of the court's findings.
That should concern every member of this committee.
Your role is not merely to process legislation.
It is to scrutinize evidence, identify inconsistencies, and
ensure Parliament does not apply one standard to private actors
and another to itself.
The question here,
members, is simple. If a private organization
relied upon decades of continuous labor, denied meaningful
employment protections, depended upon emotional
obligation and family vulnerability to ensure that labor continued,
and then sought legislative protection
when challenged in the courts, would Parliament hesitate to describe that
arrangement as exploitative? If the answer is
no, and it should be, then the Crown should not be exempt from the same
scrutiny. Parliament cannot credibly condemn
exploitation in one bill while legislating to
preserve arrangements exhibiting many of the same
characteristics in another. My submission is straightforward.
New Zealand's disability support system has become dependent upon a
level of unpaid and under-recognized family labor that,
if imposed by anyone other than the state, would attract
precisely the scrutiny this bill is intended to provide.
I therefore ask this committee to use its influence with the Social Services and
Community Committee to ensure that the Disability Support Services
Bill receives the rigorous scrutiny
it presently lacks. Parliament should not be asked to endorse
legislation that removes rights confirmed by the Supreme Court while
simultaneously advancing legislation intended to combat
exploitation in all its forms. I thank the members for
the opportunity to present this submission.
Any questions-
Thank you
... if I've got remaining seconds?
Thank you, Jane. Really appreciate it, and particularly the perspective that you've
brought to the hearing. Thank you.
It doesn't appear we have questions, but often it is just the fact that you've been
so comprehensive with your approach that we have none for you, so really
appreciate that, and-
Thank you. Thank you, Chair. Thank you
... being able to be agile with your time. Thank you, Jane.
Yeah.
Committee, we're going to take a brief break.
Our last three submitters today are unable to join us
early, so we will come back in 15 minutes.
If we can be just ahead of that 2:40 mark so that we're still on time.
We'll resume at
2:40.All
right. We're back online with
court for a subcommittee. It appears that we've got
Tanya Dunstan from Ponsonby Chambers
ready, although Taz, I think is how you'd like to be referred to,
perhaps.
So if you're available,
we'll have you now,
given we missed you slightly earlier.
Okay. No, appears to have gone. That's okay.
We'll jump to the next one,
who we have waiting. We've got Max Marshall.
Max, hopefully you're ready to go. It's your scheduled spot.
Good afternoon. Hi there.
Hello. Welcome to the committee. Hi, Max.
We have five minutes with you
this afternoon. That includes time for questions, so we'll hand it over to you now.
Fantastic. Okay. Good afternoon,
Madam Chair and members of the committee.
I'm writing in support of the bill.
I believe that many instances come about through failing
of the existing immigration system.
The three points I want to cover are open
employment as a condition of visa,
accommodation,
access to return airfare funds, and health cover.
What is central to many people who come to New Zealand under
the work visa scheme is a desire that extends far
beyond merely limited employment.
Many wish to become citizens and follow a path which obeys the
legitimate rules of the country.
That for the migrant
in coming here was this ultimate goal.
I want to protect this desire through laws that punish
those who engage in slavery for their willingness to
exploit its vulnerability of this desire in the immigrant,
their hope of citizenship.
Traditionally, we have thought of slavery as sexual
trafficking,
individuals being trafficked for sexual services.
I want us to look at other forms of relationships which involve the taking of
unfair advantage. I believe that the wording of the legislation must
be robust in terms of distinction between conduct
which does and does not constitute taking advantage of
in the position of a sponsor employer.
In short, that employers must act in good faith when bringing
people from overseas
and complying with New Zealand law and the human rights.
The violations I want to mention have occurred in
occupational roles as diverse as
domestic care, construction, and hospitality.
Unobvious categories for people to
associate with
slavery.
I would move to ensure that employment must be open,
whereby a person would not be bound to the employer.
In case of an employer's business collapsing, the visa would
allow them to stay in the country and complete their term with
another employer.
Another important point is accommodation.
If any accommodation is made as part of the offer at the point of acceptance,
the employer should not be disadvantaged or
burdened if he arrives and he finds the
accommodation is below the standard of New Zealand law
because the employer knew ahead of time,
and the alternative for the correction should also comply
with New Zealand standards.
This leads me to my next point, which is return airfares.
If a person comes to New Zealand on an employment visa, it should be a
condition of agreement for this visa that they have a paid return
airfare. One of the big questions which needs to be addressed is,
if the conditions are broken, who's
responsible? And I think this should fall on the employer,
as the
worker made decisions based on what they were told by
the employer.
Up until recent times, we could have been forgiven for
attaching some
ethnic profiles to this kind of offense.
In recent times, the offender's
profile has come from Pacific Island communities and the
offending against members of their own ethnic group.
There is a pattern which has emerged in the profile which the
offender has occupied. Offenders have held
positions of trust and manner in their community.
Any punishment must therefore be high enough to send two messages.
First, recognition of the seriousness of the crime and its harm.
And two, the mantle of social standing which
gave-The offender, this position, which permitted them to
commit the crime in the first place, should not be allowed to be
used as a badge they cling to in giving them immunity or leniency in
sentencing, or that lack of financial
assets cannot be utilized to provide a shield against
meaningful financial punishment.
Thank
you.
That-
That's all the time we have for you today.
Yep.
Appreciate your participation-
Right
... in this process, and thank you very much for your written and your oral
submission. We really appreciate it.
Pleasure.
We appreciate the perspective that you bring. Thank you.
We'll move on now to-
Thank you.
Thank you. We'll move on now to, the Business Council for Sustainable Development
Australia.
I don't have the name of who we're hearing from, but I'm sure all will be revealed.
Andrew, it looks like you're it.
Welcome.
We have 10 minutes with you this afternoon.
That includes time for questions from the committee. Do bear that in mind.
So Chair and members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear
today. My name is Andrew Peterson, and I'm the Chief Executive
Officer for the Business Council for Sustainable Development Australia.
Before I begin, I wish to acknowledge Te Ara
Tiwa
and Ngati Toa Rangitara
as mana-- For mana--
Oh, forgive me. Mana whenua
of Aotearoa, New Zealand. I also wish to
acknowledge the Cammeraygal people from whose land I am joining you today, and I
pay my respects to elders past and present.
So the BCSD Australia is a CEO-led
business organization working with Australian business and partners to accelerate
sustainable development.
We are part of the World Business Council for Sustainable Development Global
Network, and our work is practical, with governance, reporting, value
chains, people, climate, nature, circularity, and
business leadership as part of our remit.
First, let me say that we welcome this bill.
Our written submission supports passage in principle with targeted amendments.
Our position is straightforward, that New Zealand should have a credible
modern slavery reporting regime.
It should increase transparency, strengthen governance,
support victims, and encourage businesses to identify and
address risks in their operations and their supply chains.
But design does matter.
A regime like this succeeds when it changes behavior.
It succeeds when it encourages businesses to look harder,
ask better questions, engage suppliers more
effectively, provide safer grievance pathways, and remediate
harm where it is found. It won't succeed if
it produces defensive, generic statements written mainly
to manage legal exposure. So our evidence today is offered
in that spirit. We are not asking the committee to lower the
ambition of the bill. In fact, we are asking that the bill be made practical
enough to implement well. I also acknowledge the work of
the Sustainable Business Council in New Zealand, our WBCSD
global partner.
SBC NZ has already made its own submission.
We are not here to speak for them, but we do note that there is a strong
alignment in the core implementation issues.
Namely, the need for modern slavery legislation, for the importance of
workability, alignment with comparable overseas regimes,
where possible, reduced duplication, and clear definitions and
early guidance. There are three points, though, I'd like to draw the committee's
attention to. The first is trans-Tasman interoperability.
Many Australian-headquartered and trans-Tasman businesses
already report under Australia's Modern Slavery Act.
Some will be directly captured by this bill, and they are members of our
organization, where they carry on business in New Zealand.
Others will be indirectly affected through supplier questionnaires,
contract terms, customer due diligence, audit requests, and grievance
mechanisms expectations. The New Zealand bill is
broadly aligned with the Australian model, but it does go further in important
respects. It does include reporting on incidents, complaints,
remediation, training, and consultation.
It also includes stronger enforcement settings.
Those additions may well be justified, but they do, we think, require
careful design. Our recommendation is not that New
Zealand simply copy Australia. Far from it.
Our recommendation is that New Zealand allow businesses to use comparable
overseas statements where those statements meet New
Zealand's requirements and properly address New Zealand's
operations and supply chains of that organization.
In simple terms, one high-quality statement should be capable of
satisfying multiple regimes, provided it covers the
right things. This is not to emphasize a lower standard
approach. It is about avoiding duplicated reporting where a statement
genuinely meets New Zealand's requirements and covers New
Zealand
operations and its supply chain.
That would direct effect,
that would direct effort rather, to risk identification and remediation
rather than duplicate reporting architecture.
Our second point is that it should be safe, lawful, and have
proportionate disclosure. The bill rightly focuses on
incidents, complaints, and remediation, but public
reporting about modern slavery can involve sensitive information.
For example, vulnerable workers, whistleblowers, unresolved
allegations, criminal investigations, privacy
obligations, and financial crime reporting requirements.
The law should encourage candor, but it should not create
incentives to say lessFor that reason, the bill or
supporting guidance should distinguish between confirmed incidents,
validated complaints, unresolved credible allegations, and risk
indicators. It should also, where possible, provide a clear
safe harbor allowing entities to withhold or
anonymize or aggregate or in fact delay disclosure
where that publication would be unlawful,
unsafe, compromise an investigation, endanger
individuals, or conflict with financial crime, privacy,
or enforcement law obligations.
This should not excuse non-reporting, to be
clear. It should protect the way sensitive information is disclosed,
not whether serious issues are reported.
This is particularly important for regulated sectors.
For example, the financial sector and financial institutions
in particular, where it may include anti-money laundering,
counter-terrorism financing, sanctions, privacy, law
enforcement, or tiffing-off restrictions that they are bound by.
A third and final point is that implementation should be practical.
Businesses need clear rules on reporting periods, group
statements, first reporting deadlines, transition
arrangements, and guidance. We recommend allowing entities to
report on their ordinary financial year or
an approved 12-month reporting period.
We would also recommend express group and joint statement provisions,
particularly where many large businesses manage modern
slavery risk through group-wide systems and
policies and their governance. The committee, we think, should
also ensure that guidance, the templates, any sector
notes are available well before the first reporting deadline, and
that guidance would support large reporting entities, but also small and
medium suppliers who will feel the practical effects of the regime
through supply chain expectations.
The core test should be whether the bill directs effort towards better
identification, prevention, mitigation, and
remediation of modern slavery. The regime should also
reward companies that find and fix problems, not companies
that avoid looking. With targeted amendments on
interoperability, safe disclosure, and practical implementation,
we believe the bill can make a credible contribution to responsible business
conduct, worker protection, and durable trans-Tasman
alignment. Thank you, Chair. I'm pleased to assist the committee with any
questions it may have.
Thank you very much, Andrew. Very helpful for us so far.
We've got a question from Camilla Belich.
Thank you, Andrew. Thank you for joining us and for your submission.
We've heard a number of submissions like yours around
alignment with New Zealand and Australia, and I think that's something that the
committee is interested in looking into.
One of the, I suppose, issues that we have is that we understand
Australia's looking to change their regime at the same
time as we're introducing one. From your experience
and knowledge of what is likely to occur in Australia, what would your
advice be to the committee if we were looking to genuinely make
changes that would create enduring alignment and, as you
say, not lead to a weaker
disclosure system, but lead to one that
doesn't increase duplication?
Yeah. And a very good question, and thank you for the
shout-out in relation to the changes that have been proposed in Australia.
I think it's a case of
don't wait because you never know what's not going to happen or is going to
happen in any jurisdiction, and that the work that you've
already commenced broadly aligns with, as I've indicated, what's going
on in Australia. In terms of the work that's being undertaken
on the introduction of a potential due diligence requirement
in Australia, that may or may not happen.
And with that, there may or may not be a period of time in which it
will be introduced. So I would not want another
jurisdiction to feel that it had to wait or had to accommodate an
anticipated event that may or may not happen.
I think what you've proposed thus far is, as I've indicated in the
written submission, broadly in alignment with what's going on in Australia.
There are just some matters of tweaking, we think, that
would already provide for it
to be in alignment with what's going on in Australia, and it would not
be adverse to what then happens should Australia make some
further changes to elements that
would increase or strengthen the operation of the modern slavery legislation in
Australia. I hope that answers the question.
Thank you.
Thank you, Andrew. Yes. One of those things, isn't it?
We heard the line, "Don't let perfect be the enemy of good," in this case.
I didn't want to say it that way, but yes that's exactly what I meant.
Exactly. No, we hear that. Thank you so much for joining us
and bringing your perspective from Australia and what you've gone through so far.
We appreciate it.
Thank you for the opportunity.
All right.
Bye.
We'll move on now to,
PSA Alma Network and PSA Youth Network.
We have a joint hearing. There we go. Look at that. So sharp.
Welcome to you both, and we have 10 minutes with you.
That includes time for questions, and we'll hand over to you now.
Kia ora koutou nga mihi nui for hearing from us today, Madam Chair and
subcommittee A.
Ko Pasang Sherpa toku ingoa. Ke te pukenga here tikanga mahi aho e mahi ana.
I work for the PSA. My name is Pasang Sherpa.
I'm a union organizer, and I'm the organizer for the PSA's Alma Network.
Alma is the network for PSA members of Asian, Latin
American
Middle Eastern and African backgrounds.
The network supports Asian and MELA members to come together collectively and
form a voice from their communities and of their communities.
Unfortunately, our colleagues from the PSA Youth Network were unable to attend
today because of sickness, but we do support their submission on the Modern Day
Slavery Bill. Also, the youth network have been campaigning on
combating modern-day slavery and taking action on it, and encouraging the Prime
Minister to get behind it as well. So we're both very glad to see this
legislation progressing.
I'm going to introduce Preyash, who is one of the ALMA network
members, and on our ALMA network committee, and to speak to our
submission. Kia ora.
Awesome. Tuatahi, tena te mihi ki ngā mana whenua i tēnei rohe, ko
Taranaki whānui, ki te upoko o te ika, me Ngāti Toa Rangatira.
Tua toru, tua rua, tena tena mihi ki a kōrua.
Ko Camilla Bellich mō te Labour
MP, raua ko National MP ko Greg Fleming.
Tena tena mihi, tena tena mihi, tena tena mihi.
First of all, I would like to acknowledge the mana whenua of this rohe, Taranaki
Whānui ki te upoko o te ika, as well as Ngāti Toa Rangatira from where we are
presenting our submissions today.
And before I begin with the oral submissions, I would like to thank you, our
honourable MP, Camilla Belich,
from Labour, and National MP, Greg Fleming.
And everyone else who have worked tirelessly to bring this bill together, like
Trade Aid, World Vision, NZCTU, PSA, PSA Youth, and everyone
else. Obviously, I can't go on, list all those names because of the time
constraints. And obviously, I would also like to thank you, our chair, our
honourable MP Katie and Vanessa, and everyone else who has been helping us.
And this bill is particularly relevant to the members of our ALMA network,
because of their whakapapa, because of their ethnic, migrant and ethnic
minority workers
can face additional barriers to recognizing or challenging or
reporting exploitative practices in their work conditions.
And as a trade unionist myself, we know that this is the
unfortunate lived reality of many kaimahi, many workers from the
Global South who live
here and then call their home in Aotearoa.
And obviously we support this bill, and its intent and objectives, and we see this
as the first
important step in strengthening the
accountability for modern slavery risk here in Aotearoa and supply
chains connected to any things that comes to Aotearoa.
Now, before I go to the recommendations that we have, which are around the cultural
as well as the rep, which are, we really love the
presentations by Andrew and on the similar line.
So many ethnic minority workers remain vulnerable to the
exploitations and then unsafe workplace practices due to their
cultural, economic, social, and structural barriers.
And then it becomes so much important that the Modern Slavery Bill like this
reflect the lived realities of our migrant and ethnic minority communities
whānau.
Just to make sure that the reporting mechanisms are culturally safe and accessible,
in whatever way they feel that they can report.
So our recommendations that we have, which are the three key recommendations that
I'm going to read, is grounded in the experience of our wider whānau,
our ALMA network, who can be particularly vulnerable, as I mentioned,
and then obviously face the additional barriers whenever it comes to speaking up.
For this reason, we consider that the bill should be strengthened further to
ensure that it is worker-centered and responsive to the realities of the
workers.
Now, we have a few suggestions, as I mentioned.
The first is around the establishment of the regulations, and that could be the
regulatory commissioner or organizations that.
So any establishment that we will have under this bill should be properly
resourced, and that way they are sufficiently empowered to monitor and
enforce compliance under this bill.
And adding to that, these organizations or the
commissioners that we have should be required to establish the safe reporting
pathways, which Andrew also hinted towards, like the anonymous
complaint mechanisms that includes the safety
of the whistleblowers. And for example, it could be
also be the multilingual reporting options and resources, and as well as that ties
to the education programs for
both migrant or former refugee communities and employers.
Now, for us to combat modern-day slavery here in Aotearoa and overseas, we need to
take this bill,
not only institute the strong reporting mechanism, but also the strong compliance,
because any bill is good only when we have a strong mechanisms of enforcement,
and then obviously that comes to the due diligence and compliance and penalties, of
course, is included on there for organizations.
And we also want to highlight that
it should be expanded to the organization of all sizes.
At this moment, it is only for the
organization which has a net worth of more than 100 million, but we want to
emphasize that this should be covering for all the sizes.
That should be the next step. And we support the most expansive and detailed
definitions of the modern slavery to address all images of power and forms of
coercions on peoples, including of those at most risk
of these modern slavery conditions in Aotearoa.
So what we want to emphasize here is that the definition should also be grounded on
the labor exploitation that is currently happening here in Aotearoa.
Secondly, we also want to emphasize, the second point that we want to emphasize is
around the
safe reporting mechanisms. So many, as Pasang mentioned, that our workers
are whakapapa to different
ethnic communities. So they are less likely to challenge employers,
report misconduct, or question any authority figures based on their whakapapa or
based on their cultural experience.
So as a result, any exploited practices that may
remain hidden even within the organizations that probably
look like it's a compliant on the surface.
And also just to add on that, the societal attitudes and misconceptions about
our Asian and MELA whānau may further disenfranchise them
towards supporting those. So which means that it requires active and a
very serious effort on the part of employers and regulatory bodies to bring
issues to light by engaging with these
communities.And on those reporting mechanisms, what
we also like to emphasize is that to engage with them, there should be
consideration in the context of
without the trusted reporting mechanisms, exploitation risks may remain concealed
despite any formal compliance framework which this particular bill propose.
So compliance frameworks alone are insufficient if
organizations do not understand the cultural dynamics or the cultural
whakapapa that contribute to the worker vulnerability, and then obviously adds to
the modern slavery.
Support and remedies should be made available for victims that we've just
listed around just the pay minimum, the visa protections for more accessible
to immigrants who may have been exploited and to add to the mental health, and
other things that could be provided.
And thirdly, we would like to draw our attention to this recommendation in our
submissions around the government procurement contracts, because we understand that
the government procurement plays a very significant role, and it
represents significant economic influence and should be used to
ensure that the public funds from Aotearoa are not supporting exploitative
labor practices directly or indirectly.
And especially modern slavery and labor exploitations risks are often very
highest in the sectors that involve subcontracting and the
labor hire arrangements or the outsource services that goes out of Aotearoa,
and which probably might use temporary migrant labor.
So the risk of the exploitations and then modern slavery becomes
increasingly difficult to identify deeper within those complicated supply chains
where oversight is weaker and accountability becomes diluted.
And so workers employed by these subcontractors are often the least visible, yet
most vulnerable participants within this procurement and supply chain system.
So for this reason, we emphasize that the government agencies and the large
organizations should not rely solely on direct supplier assurances without
broader supply chain due diligence.
Now, to conclude our submissions, and before we take any further questions,
we definitely feel that this bill represents an important opportunity for
Aotearoa, New Zealand to strengthen ethical labor
protections and supply chain accountability and we definitely support this bill.
However, any effective implementations require, as we mentioned, that the proper
mechanisms and the proper policies and enough resources on the ground.
And thank you for considering these submissions.
Yeah. Kia ora.
Thank you both. We have actually reached the end of our time with you
during our submission, but a really comprehensive submission.
Yeah.
So we do appreciate it. Well thought out, and so thank you very much for being
part of this process for both of you.
Thanks very much for having us. Thanks for your time.
Thank you.
Kia ora.
Team, we'll move into our
full committee now. So if we jump off the public session, we'll go into the
private session as one committee. Thank you.
That's at 3:10, but you can jump on now.